Completely revamp p2p (#11)
utreexo/biptreexo: utreexo-p2p-bip.md

# Motivation

Utreexo nodes require the inclusion proof to fully validate blocks and transactions.
Each block has an corresponding inclusion proof with it and this inclusion proof for blocks up to height 906,937 requires an additional 631.85GB, which is roughly 40GB less than the size of the block data.
Each transaction also has an corresponding inclusion proof with it and for normal transaction relay, the proof is roughly 3 times the size of the transaction.
It's still reasonable for a single node to download this extra data but little caching goes a long way in reducing the amount of data that one has to download.
We define the new P2P messages for the inclusion proofs to support caching to reduce bandwidth while also allowing a high bandwidth, low-latency usage.

# License

This BIP is licensed under the BSD-3-Clause license.

# Overview

## Requirements and Compatibility

Nodes implementing Utreexo can choose which messages to support.
There are a number of configurations possible, and this BIP does not restrict nodes to any subsets of messages.

> That said, there are three likely types of nodes: Compact State Nodes (CSNs) which have the goal of minimizing data storage and download while performing block validation, and archive and bridge nodes which store more data and provide this data to CSNs.

Reviewer: this `and archive and bridge nodes` is a bit confusing. Perhaps something like this would be clearer (it also makes the sentence smaller, rn it's one big sentence.

```suggestion
That said, there are three likely types of nodes: Compact State Nodes (CSNs), bridges and archives. CSNs have the goal of minimizing data storage and download while performing block validation. Archive and bridge nodes store more data and provide this data to CSNs.
```

Bridge nodes are nodes that can add inclusion proofs to mempool transactions, support the same set of messages as CSNs, and are in fact should be indistinguishable from CSNs on the network.

> Archive nodes are able to serve the blocks and the inclusion proofs. However, they are not able to generate the inclusion proofs as they do not keep the full UTXO set.

Reviewer: Are those meant to be separated paragraphs? Cause they don't have an empty line between then. They are rendered as one big paragraph.

Author: No just one big paragraph. I was trying out this thing where every sentence takes up a single line.

Someone said they do this at their company and it works well since you don't need to worry about editing sentences for wrapping.

Note that the archive and bridge capabilities of a node are separate; a bridge node can be bridge only, without previous block proof data, and an archive node doesn't need to be able to bridge.

The one exception to this flexibility is that archive nodes must provide both the blocks and the inclusion proofs.

> While theoretically possible to split these two resources, the bock summaries are quite small relative to the block proofs, and it simplifies clients to be able to rely on being able to request both over the same connection.

Reviewer: The first paragraph says blocks, and the second says block summaries. I think the first one is wrong? (We should be able to serve only proofs and not blocks)

Author: Ah this is old. I'll get rid of the block summaries part

## Pre-P2P: Bridge Building

When introducing Utreexo into an existing network, there are 2 thing needed before CSNs can operate.
First, archive nodes need to build proofs for old blocks to serve during the initial-block download (IBD).
Second, nodes need to build and maintain the UTXO merkle forest, and an index of outpoints to leaves of that forest, so that they can build proofs for new transactions.
Both of these processes happen without any p2p messages by taking an already existing, synchronized archive full node and going through its stored block data.

Once an archive and bridge node have been established, CSNs download blocks and inclusion proofs to IBD and maintain sync with the bitcoin network. 

## Initial Block Download

![Current IBD](images/current-ibd.png)

Current IBD is done by a headers-first block download, which downloads all the Bitcoin block headers, verifies that they connect and start downloading the actual block data for the headers.

![Utreexo node IBD](images/utreexo-node-ibd.png)

> Utreexo nodes will also perform the headers download but they also require the inclusion proof along with the block data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Utreexo nodes still perform the headers-first phase. However,  in addition to blocks, they also require the inclusion proof for UTXOs spent in that block.
```

Hence a Utreexo node will send a `getutreexoproof` message along with the `getdata` message for a given block.

> This flow is the simpliest change and allows a Utreexo node to validate and perform IBD but this method does require downloading about 2 times compared to the current nodes as the inclusion proof for a block is roughly the same size as the block itself.

Reviewer: `s/simpliest/simplest/`

![Bandwidth efficient Utreexo node IBD](images/bandwidth-efficient-utreexo-node-ibd.png)

> For utreexo nodes with memory to spare, we introduce a `ttl` messsage that will have a time-to-live value for each of the outputs in a given block.

Reviewer: `s/utreexo/Utreexo` throughout the BIP you wrote with a capital `U`, should stick to the standard.

> With these ttl values, a node receiving the `ttl` message will be able to determine which output to cache with the clairvoyant algorithm[^1] which allows the ibd-ing node to reduce the bandwidth required in syncing the node in the most efficient way possible.

Reviewer: I think the same thing with paragraphs happened here

Author: I meant it as a big paragraph but maybe it's more readable if it's separated?

> With these ttl values, a node receiving the `ttl` message will be able to determine which output to cache with the clairvoyant algorithm[^1] which allows the ibd-ing node to reduce the bandwidth required in syncing the node in the most efficient way possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these TTL values, a node receiving the `TTL` message will be able to determine which output to cache with the Clairvoyant algorithm[^1] which allows the IBD-ing node to reduce the bandwidth required in syncing the node in the most efficient way possible.
```

If the node receiving the inv is does not have a tx matching that hash, it then requests for it using a getdata message.

![Utreexo TX relay](images/utreexo-tx-relay.png)

The transaction relay for utreexo nodes doesn't add any extra round trips.
However, it does include extra inventory vectors in the inv message.
We introduce a new inventory vector type called `utreexoproofhash` which make up the extra information that a utreexo node will receive.
A hash with the type `utreexoproofhash` represents 4 utreexo merkle tree positions, each of them little endian serialized and taking up 8 bytes in the 32 byte hash.
When sending an inv message to a utreexo node for a tx, we append `utreexoproofhash` inventory vectors to represent the merkle tree positions for each of the utxos being referenced in the inputs of the tx.
The utreexo merkle tree positions are explained in detail in the bip "Utreexo Accumulator Specification".
Since the hash in an inventory vector is always 32 bytes, any unused space will be padded with the max uint64 value of 18446744073709551615.

> With these merkle tree positions for the utxos referenced in the inputs, we can calculate the the needed positions of the merkle hashes to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these merkle tree positions for the utxos referenced in the inputs, we can calculate the needed positions of the merkle hashes to them.
```

These positions are then sent over in the `getdata` message as an another inventory vector.

![Utreexo TX relay multiple Utreexo proof hash vectors](images/utreexo-tx-relay-multiple-proofhash-vectors.png)

There may be cases where the transaction is referencing more than 4 merkle positions.
In this case, the extra positions are added as another inventory vector.
There can be as many additional inventory vectors for the `utreexoproofhash`es as needed.
An inventory vector of type `utreexoproofhash` will be ignored if it's not prepended with an inventory vector of type `transaction`.

![Utreexo TX relay with multiple txs](images/utreexo-tx-relay-with-multiple-txs.png)

It's possible to have an inv message with multiple txs as well.
Note that an inventory vector of type `utreexoproofhash` MUST be appended to the `tx` inventory vector.

## Block Propagation

![Legacy Block Propagation](images/legacy-block-propagation.png)

Legacy block propagation without Compact Blocks comprises of three steps:

> 1: Node A sends an inv message or a block header to Node B.

Reviewer: Need to add a space before the numbers to make it work as a list

|--------------|---------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| block height | uint32              | The time-to-live value of a leaf in the Utreexo merkle forest. The value is determined by the amount of leaves that were added to the accumulator since its creation |
| length       | varint              | The length of the TTLs                                                                                                                                               |
| TTLs         | vector of TTL infos | position in the Utreexo merkle forest when the leaf was removed                                                                                                      |

## New Messages

### MSG_UTREEXO_PROOF

`MSG_UTREEXO_PROOF` is all the data required for a CSN or archive node using the Utreexo accumulators to validate a Bitcoin block.

> Its [BIP324 P2PV2](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0324.mediawiki#user-content-v2_Bitcoin_P2P_message_structure) message type is `29`.

Reviewer: (The thing I've mentioned over signal)

Apart from the BIP324 message id we need the V1 cmdString, I think for this one is `uproof` right?

Author: Ohh right I get what you mean now. I'll add those.

They're just not called cmdString in btcd code heh
